# **New 341 Global climate Change course**

**Overarching learning goals :**

This course is designed to build a foundation of climate science and
bring students to the level at which they can find, read, understand and
synthesize climate science information presented in climate change
assessment reports like the IPCC, AMAP or other national assessment
report.

This course will prepare students to capstone project courses in which
they would mobilize this knowledge and associated resources to make
their own climate change assessment adapted to a specific environmental
question.

To this aim, students will:

<u>1. Understand the energy balance of the planet.</u>

Explain how the greenhouse effect works in terms of energy flow.

Identify forcing factors, describe feedback loops, and critically
evaluate the relative importance of various external forcings and
feedbacks at different timescales.

Critically evaluate evidence from models and paleoclimate data to
quantify the climate sensitivity, and associated uncertainties.

<u>2. Understand the basic features of the global climate system.</u>

Recognize the different climate zones, and relate observations to
atmospheric and oceanic circulation. Identify the location of fronts,
and appreciate the non-linearity and lack of spatial homogeneity in the
temperature field.

<u>3. Describe and apply the metrics of the climate change literature
:</u> choice of variables, climatology, natural variability,
significance of projected changes. Understand the IPCC “likelihood”
wording.

<u>4. Critically evaluate evidence of anthropogenic impact on
climate,</u> and appreciate the magnitude and speed of the projected
change compared to past climates.

**Syllabus: (the numbers refer to 1.5hr class sessions).**

*(It’s not really worded as learning goals, but rather work in progress
about what concepts to include, and how to present them)*

**<u>Module 1: The global energy balance</u>**

**1. The Earth’s energy budget, radiative balance**

**2. The greenhouse effect.**

**3. Forcings and feedbacks (stocks and flows)**

**4-5. Application : Ice age cycles**

\- review evidence of how much cooler the planet was during the last ice
age

\- compare and contrast with the climate projections in 2100

\- discuss evidence of the deglaciation, the rate of change of
temperature, the impact on the ecosystems

**6. Climate sensitivity**

\- describe methodology to evaluate climate sensitivity both from paleo
data and models, and where uncertainties come from.

By the end of this module, students should appreciate what a 2°C warmer
world means.

**<u>Module 2: Dynamics</u>**

**7-8. The atmospheric general circulation**

1 day for the mechanism, 1 day for a worksheet, using paleo evidence.

Point on a map the location of the different cells

Understand the connection between the global energy balance, the
meridional temperature gradient, and the position of wet/dry zones on
earth.

Perhaps introduce the “anomaly” maps of the IPCC, and how to read them,
especially the precipitation maps.

**9. Ocean circulation: gyres**

Describe the mixed layer, introduce Argo and the evidence of where the
heat (and carbon) is absorbed.

**10. Ocean circulation : upwelling/downwelling**

Understand the mechanisms leading to upwelling, and relate it to the
atmospheric circulation

Analyze a satellite chlorophyll map to identify the upwelling regions

Ocean biogeochemical cycles. Apply it to BC waters?

**11. Ocean circulation: AMOC**

If time allows, discuss abrupt climate changes, DO events, from the ice
core record.

**12-13. Ocean-atmosphere interactions: the monsoon**

Understand the concept of see breeze; how it applies to all spatial
scales; how the monsoon is interwoven with the ITCZ. Could have an
assignment on analysing evidence of the Green Sahara at 6ka; Could also
discuss positive and negative feedback explaining why it's not clear in
the future whether monsoon rain will become more intense using latest
IPCC data.

**14-15. Ocean atmosphere interactions: ENSO**

For ENSO; emphasize the concept of energy storage and release; discuss
why ENSO years are anomalously warm years for the planet.

**16. Natural climate variability : LAB**

In this lecture/lab, we explain how we define the “climatology”, the
“preindustrial”, how we choose a period of reference, and the
difficulties associated with it. We also discuss the statistical
definition of “natural climate variability” based on observations, and
apply it to variability of different time scales, in the atmosphere and
in the ocean.

**<u>Module 3: Global Climate change</u>**

**17. Human activities are impacting the climate system**

Review the greenhouse effect, discuss land use change?, feedbacks,

**18. The carbon cycle**

Discuss the carbon cycle with bio and physical pump: HNLC regions,
Discuss tight coupling between CO2 and Antarctic temperature; review
climate sensitivity. Explain where the carbon is going, and how it will
stay in the atmosphere for 100+ years.

**19. Climate change projections**

Describe how the IPCC report works, and how the scenarios are made

**20. Projected temperature change, and attribution LAB**

This will be a lab to select a part of the world, and look at the mean
annual temperature change for RCP8.5, and compare it to the results of
the lab of “natural climate variability”, to reproduce IPCC global
change maps. Will follow a discussion on why the impact is not the same
everywhere on Earth.

**<u>Module 4. Regional climate change</u>**

From here on, we’ll try to use the same framework for every topic, so
that students get used to apply the tools.

**21. Arctic climate change**

Describe mechanisms for arctic amplification, discuss impacts on the
general circulation.

Redo the lab for the Arctic with separated winter and summer change,
discuss why there is more warming in winter. Review the concept of
feedbacks.

**22-23; Weather and climate extremes (IPCC chap 11)**

Droughts, floods wildfires.

For weather and climate extremes 2 lectures in total; based on IPCC
content of observations vs projections: Focus work on discussing on how
to define robust metrics, and separate variability from change:
Introduce students to the complexity of looking at the extremes rather
than the mean. See if; in the future; we can make some dashboard to let
students define and test their own metrics.

Probably focus on heat waves, to keep it simple and stay focused on the
temperature variable.

**24.Tropical ocean change - Ocean acidification**

Review enso. Critically analyse paleoclimate coral data to investigate
the sensitivity of corals to temperature extremes.

Review evidence from biogeochem argo about how much C is going to the
ocean; explain ocean acidification.

Bring both together in a worksheet with data from ocean circulation to
derive where corals are in danger of dying:

Clear up confusion between bleaching and ocean acidification.

**<u>Optional topics I’d love to do, but probably won’t have time:</u>**

**1. Glacier changes**

\- Describe a glacier, accumulation and ablation

\- define a relevant climate indicator: nb of positive degree days

\- review evidence of glacier changes, put it into historical context

\- quantify the impacts with RCP scenarios

**2. Sea level rise**

\- describe the evidence, the magnitude of the respective contributions

\- lecture on marine ice sheet instability

\- sea level rise projections

\- impact: direct, and indirect with storm surge, coastal erosion…

Who needs a sea level rise assessment? Where to find the right
information? What is the relevant variable to analyse? Where do you find
the data, how do you present it?

**3. Aerosols**

\- cloud condensation nuclei, interaction of aerosols with
precipitation, impact on the radiative balance. Emphasize the lifetime
of the forcing compared to CO2, discuss volcanic forcing, discuss
pollution issues and health related issues.

**For info: Course Level Goals of existing 340:**

-   Critically EVALUATE evidence in order to explain how Earth’s climate
    system works

-   Critically EVALUATE hypotheses on what causes climate change,
    including both natural and human contributions

-   EXPLAIN how paleo-, historical, and modelling data all inform
    predictions of future climate

-   Critically EVALUATE arguments made in public debate on global
    climate change

Pervasive, foundational, interconnected goals:

-   Explain how the greenhouse effect works, in terms of energy flows

-   Explain when and why some components of Earth’s climate system are
    “forcings” and others are “feedbacks”

-   Apply systems dynamics thinking (stocks, flows, amplifying and
    stabilizing feedbacks, delays) to all aspects

-   of Earth’s climate system

-   Evaluate uncertainty estimates for climate indicators, past,
    present, and future.
